Hello and welcome. In this video, we'll be
covering K-Means Clustering. So let's get
started. Imagine that you have a customer dataset
and you need to apply customer segmentation on
this historical data. Customer segmentation is
the practice of partitioning a customer base
into groups of individuals that have similar
characteristics. One of the algorithms that
can be used for customer segmentation is
K-Means clustering. K-Means can group data
only unsupervised based on the similarity of
customers to each other. Let's define this
technique more formally. There are various types
of clustering algorithms such as partitioning,
hierarchical or density-based clustering. K-Means
is a type of partitioning clustering, that is,
it divides the data into K non-overlapping subsets
or clusters without any cluster internal structure
or labels. This means, it's an unsupervised
algorithm. Objects within a cluster are very
similar, and objects across different clusters
are very different or dissimilar. As you can see,
for using K-Means we have to find similar
samples: for example, similar customers. Now,
we face a couple of key questions. First, how can
we find the similarity of samples in clustering,
and then how do we measure how similar two
customers are with regard to their demographics?
Though the objective of K-Means is to form
clusters in such a way that similar samples go
into a cluster, and dissimilar samples fall into
different clusters, it can be shown that instead
of a similarity metric, we can use dissimilarity
metrics. In other words, conventionally the
distance of samples from each other is used to
shape the clusters. So we can say K-Means tries to
minimize the intra-cluster distances and maximize
the inter-cluster distances. Now, the question is,
how can we calculate the dissimilarity or distance
of two cases such as two customers? Assume that we
have two customers, we will call them Customer one
and two. Let's also assume that we have only one
feature for each of these two customers and that
feature is age. We can easily use a specific type
of Minkowski distance to calculate the distance of
these two customers. Indeed, it is the Euclidean
distance. What about if we have more than one
feature, for example, age and income? For example,
if we have income and age for each customer, we
can still use the same formula but this time in
a two-dimensional space. Also, we can use the same
distance matrix for multidimensional vectors. Of
course, we have to normalize our feature set to
get the accurate dissimilarity measure. There are
other dissimilarity measures as well that can be
used for this purpose, but it is highly dependent
on datatype and also the domain that clustering
is done for it. For example you may use Euclidean
distance, cosine similarity, average distance,
and so on. Indeed, the similarity measure highly
controls how the clusters are formed, so it is
recommended to understand the domain knowledge
of your dataset and datatype of features and then
choose the meaningful distance measurement. Now,
let's see how K-Means clustering works. For the
sake of simplicity, let's assume that our dataset
has only two features: the age and income of
customers. This means, it's a two-dimensional
space. We can show the distribution of customers
using a scatter plot: The Y-axis indicates age and
the X-axis shows income of customers. We try to
cluster the customer dataset into distinct groups
or clusters based on these two dimensions.
In the first step, we should determine the
number of clusters. The key concept of the K-Means
algorithm is that it randomly picks a center point
for each cluster. It means we must initialize K
which represents number of clusters. Essentially,
determining the number of clusters in a
dataset or K is a hard problem in K-Means,
that we will discuss later. For now, let's put
K equals three here for our sample dataset. It
is like we have three representative points for
our clusters. These three data points are called
centroids of clusters and should be of same
feature size of our customer feature set. There
are two approaches to choose these centroids. One,
we can randomly choose three observations out of
the dataset and use these observations as the
initial means. Or two, we can create three random
points as centroids of the clusters which is our
choice that is shown in the plot with red color.
After the initialization step which was defining
the centroid of each cluster, we have to assign
each customer to the closest center. For this
purpose, we have to calculate the distance of each
data point or in our case each customer from the
centroid points. As mentioned before, depending on
the nature of the data and the purpose for which
clustering is being used different measures of
distance may be used to place items into clusters.
Therefore, you will form a matrix where each row
represents the distance of a customer from each
centroid. It is called the Distance Matrix. The
main objective of K-Means clustering is to
minimize the distance of data points from the
centroid of this cluster and maximize the distance
from other cluster centroids. So, in this step,
we have to find the closest centroid to each data
point. We can use the distance matrix to find
the nearest centroid to datapoints. Finding the
closest centroids for each data point, we assign
each data point to that cluster. In other words,
all the customers will fall to a cluster based on
their distance from centroids. We can easily say
that it does not result in good clusters because
the centroids were chosen randomly from the first.
Indeed, the model would have a high error. Here,
error is the total distance of each point from its
centroid. It can be shown as within-cluster sum of
squares error. Intuitively, we try to reduce this
error. It means we should shape clusters in such
a way that the total distance of all members of
a cluster from its centroid be minimized. Now,
the question is, how can we turn it into better
clusters with less error? Okay, we move centroids.
In the next step, each cluster center will be
updated to be the mean for datapoints in its
cluster. Indeed, each centroid moves according to
their cluster members. In other words the centroid
of each of the three clusters becomes the new
mean. For example, if point A coordination is
7.4 and 3.6, and B point features are 7.8 and 3.8,
the new centroid of this cluster with two points
would be the average of them, which is 7.6 and
3.7. Now, we have new centroids. As you can guess,
once again we will have to calculate the distance
of all points from the new centroids. The points
are reclustered and the centroids move again.
This continues until the centroids no longer
move. Please note that whenever a centroid
moves, each point's distance to the centroid
needs to be measured again. Yes, K-Means is an
iterative algorithm and we have to repeat steps
two to four until the algorithm converges. In each
iteration, it will move the centroids, calculate
the distances from new centroids and assign data
points to the nearest centroid. It results in
the clusters with minimum error or the most dense
clusters. However, as it is a heuristic algorithm,
there is no guarantee that it will converge to
the global optimum and the result may depend on
the initial clusters. It means, this algorithm
is guaranteed to converge to a result, but the
result may be a local optimum i.e. not necessarily
the best possible outcome. To solve this problem,
it is common to run the whole process multiple
times with different starting conditions. This
means with randomized starting centroids, it may
give a better outcome. As the algorithm is usually
very fast, it wouldn't be any problem to run it
multiple times. Thanks for watching this video.